---
layout: page
---

# External Features

## Introduction

The outside of a church and the surrounding churchyard typically contain many interesting features, as well as being a haven for wildlife.

## Lychgate

Lych is derived from the Old English ‘lich’, meaning corpse. They were meeting places and shelters for the party bringing a corpse for burial, and for the priest to receive the corpse.

Although some had been built earlier, the 1549 Prayer Book required the priest to meet the corpse at the churchyard entrance. This encouraged the provision of lychgates to shelter the corpse and the funeral party for that purpose.

Medieval lychgates were made of timber and most have long since disappeared. However, many new lychgates were erected in Victorian times, sometimes as memorials to prominent local people or as war memorials.

## Churchyard 

## Yew Trees

## Churchyard Path

## Preaching and Churchyard Cross

## Tower or Spire

## Carillon

## Buttress

## Niche

Most ancient churches have a niche, usually on or near the porch, where a statue of the church’s patron saint was displayed. Today, often they are empty.

## Dripstone

A dripstone is a projecting stone moulding over doorways, windows and archways. It was designed to throw off rainwater and prevent it from running down tracery and glass. 

It was also used for ornament and sometimes heads, grotesques or other ornamentations are carved at either end of the dripstone.

## Gargoyle

The word gargoyle derives from the Old French 'gargouille', meaning throat.

A gargoyle is a projecting waterspout, usually incorporating a lead pipe. They were often carved in the shape of grotesque faces, beasts or figures. Gargoyles appear to have been first introduced around 1200. 

Celtic warriors were known to chop off the heads of defeated enemies and display them in public. This may account for the popularity of gargoyles.

## Sundial

Most medieval churches have a sundial.

It is usually situated above the porch or on the south face of the tower. Its main purpose was to ensure that the bell was rung at the correct time to mark daytime canonical hours. In many places, the sundial was the only reliable public timepiece until the early 19th century.

Eventually sundials developed into church clocks.

## Scratch Dial

Also known as Mass Dials, these were a very early and primitive form of sun dial. They were used by priests to advertise the time of the next service.

Usually in the form of a semi circle about ten inches across, they were scratched into the south wall of the church. A hole was bored at the centre and a number of lines scratched from the hole to the arc. The priest would place a short stick in the hole and when the sun shone the shadow of the stick on to one of the lines, the next service would start.

## Devil's Door

The Devil's door was in the north wall of the church.

This door was traditionally left open during a baptism to let out any evil spirits in the child. Following the reformation, many devils doors were removed or blocked up.

## Corbel Table / Stones

Corbel stones are projections of stone, brick or wood designed to support an arch or beam.

A corbel table is a series of corbels immediately below the roof eaves, and can be found both externally and internally. The Normans were especially fond of corbel tables, which were often elaborately carved in the form of monsters and other grotesque creatures.

## Mounting Block

A mounting block gives assistance when mounting and dismounting horses. They are frequently located outside churches for the use of parishioners attending services.

They may have iron rings nearby for the horse’s reins to be tethered to whilst its owner was in church.

## Holy Water Stoup

A stoup is a receptacle for holding holy water.

It is usually in the form of a small stone basin, in the porch near to the church door. People about to enter the church would dip their index finger in the water and make the sign of the cross upon themselves.

This practice was stopped following the Reformation and many of the stoups were removed.

## References

[https://www.explorechurches.org/outgoing-outsides](https://www.explorechurches.org/outgoing-outsides)