---
layout: page
---

Anglicanism is a Western Christian tradition that has developed from the practices, liturgy, and identity of the Church of England following the English Reformation, in the context of the Protestant Reformation in Europe.

# Diocese

Also known as a Bishopric, a diocese is an ecclesiastical district under the jurisdiction of a bishop.

Shropshire is covered by two diocese - Lichfield and Hereford.  The split is very roughly equivalent to the north and south of the county and broadly aligns with the old kingdoms of Wreocansaete and Magonsæte.

Both of Shropshire’s diocese are part of the province of Canterbury.

A suffragan bishop is a bishop appointed to help a diocesan bishop, of which there are two in Shropshire.

The Anglican Bishop of Shrewsbury is an episcopal title used by a suffragan bishop of the Church of England Diocese of Lichfield, in the Province of Canterbury, England.  The title takes its name after the town of Shrewsbury in Shropshire and was first created under the Suffragan Bishops Act 1534.

The Bishop of Ludlow was an episcopal title used by a suffragan bishop of the Church of England Diocese of Hereford, which is within the Province of Canterbury, England. The See (the area of a bishop's ecclesiastical jurisdiction) of Ludlow was created under the Suffragans Nomination Act 1888 by Order in Council dated 23 September 1981and was the only suffragan see in the Diocese of Hereford.

# Archdeaconry 

In Shropshire there are two archdeanerys, one for each diocese covering the county.

The original Shropshire archdeaconry in the Hereford diocese included the deaneries of Burford, Stottesdon, Ludlow, Pontesbury, Clun and Wenlock.  On 4th April 1876, the archdeaconry of Shropshire became the archdeaconry of Ludlow, with the additional deaneries of Bridgnorth (added in 1535), Montgomery, Bishops Castle, Condover, and Church Stretton.

The archdeaconry of Salop, now entirely in the Lichfield diocese, includes the deaneries of Edgmond, Ellesmere, Hodnet, Shrewsbury, Telford, Wem, Whitchurch and Wrockwardine. Part of Welsh Shropshire was included in the diocese of St Asaph until the disestablishment of the Church in Wales (1920), which included the deanery of Oswestry in the archdeaconry of Montgomery.

An archdeacon is a senior member the clergy who serves the dioceses’ bishop.  An archdeacon is usually responsible for the archdeaconry’s buildings and the pastoral care of the clergy within the archdeaconry.

# Deanery

A deanery is a group of parishes forming a district within an archdeaconry. The more formal term, rural deanery, is less often used, though the superintendent of a deanery is the Rural Dean. Rural deaneries are very ancient and originally corresponded with the hundreds. The title "dean" (Latin decanus) may derive from the custom of dividing a hundred into ten tithings. In medieval times rural deans acted as officers of the diocesan bishop, but archdeacons gradually took over most of their duties. However, the office was revived during the 19th century.

# Parish

A parish is a territorial entity in many Christian denominations, constituting a division within a diocese. A parish is under the pastoral care and clerical jurisdiction of a priest, often termed a parish priest, who might be assisted by one or more curates, and who operates from a parish church. Historically, a parish often covered the same geographical area as a manor. Its association with the parish church remains paramount.